so today's top chef class is in how to
rob a bank and it's clear that the
general public needs guidance because
the average bank robbery nets only
$7,500 rank amateurs who know nothing
about how to cook the books the folks
who know or course run our largest banks
and in the last go-round they cost us
over 11 trillion dollars that's what 11
trillion looks like that's how many
zeroes and cost us over 10 million jobs
as well so our task is to educate
ourselves so that we can understand why
we have these recurrent intensifying
financial crises and how we can prevent
them in the future and the answer to
that is that we have to stop epidemics
of control fraud control fraud is what
happens when the people who control
typically a CEO a seemingly legitimate
entity use it as a weapon to defraud and
these are the weapons of mass
destruction in the financial world they
also follow in finance a particular
strategy because the weapon of choice in
finance is accounting and there is a
recipe for accounting control fraud and
how it occurs and we discovered this
recipe in quite an odd way that I'll
come back to in a moment first
ingredient in the recipe grow like crazy
second by making or buying really crappy
loans but loans that are made at a very
high interest rate or yield 3 while
employing extreme leverage that just
means a lot of debt compared to your
equity and for while providing only
trivial loss reserves against the
inevitable losses if you follow those 4
simple steps in any bank can follow them
then you are mathematically guaranteed
to have three things occur the first
thing is you will report record profits
not just hi record to the CEO will
immediately be made incredibly wealthy
by modern executive compensation and
three farther down the road the bank
will suffer catastrophic losses and will
fail unless it is bailed out and that's
how that's a hint as to how we
discovered this recipe because we
discovered it through an autopsy process
during the Savings and Loan debacle in
1984 we looked at every single failure
and we looked for common characteristics
and we discovered this recipe was common
to each of these frauds in other words a
coroner could find these things because
this is a fatal recipe that will destroy
the banks as well as the economy and it
also turns out to be precisely what
could have stopped this crisis the one
that cost us 11 trillion dollars just in
the household sector the cost is 10
million jobs was the easiest financial
crisis by far to have avoided completely
if we had simply learned the lessons of
epidemics of control fraud particularly
using this recipe so let's go to this
crisis and the two huge epidemics of a
loan origination fraud that drove the
crisis appraisal fraud and liar's loans
and what we're going to see in looking
at both of these is we got warnings that
were incredibly early about these frauds
we got warnings that we could have taken
advantage of easily because back in the
Savings and Loan debacle we had figured
out how to respond and prevent these
crises and three the warnings were
unambiguous they were obvious that what
was going on was an epidemic of
accounting control fraud building up
let's take appraisal fraud first
this is simply where you inflate the
value of the home that is being pledged
as security for the loan in 2000 the
year 2000 that is over a year before
Enron fails by the way the honest
appraisers got together a formal
petition begging the federal government
to act and the industry to act to stop
this epidemic of appraisal fraud and the
appraisers explained how it was
occurring that banks were demanding that
appraisers inflate the appraisal and
that if the appraisers refused to do so
they would they the banks would
blacklist honest appraisers and refused
to use them now we've seen this before
in the Savings and Loan debacle and we
know that this kind of fraud can only
originate from the lenders and that no
honest lender would ever inflate the
appraisal because it's the great
protection against loss so this was an
incredibly early warning mm it was
something we've seen before and it was
completely unambiguous this was an
epidemic of accounting control fraud led
by the banks what about liar's loans
well that Ernie warning actually comes
earlier the Savings and Loan debacle is
basically the early 1980s through 1993
and in the midst of fighting that wave
of a counting control fraud in 1990 we
found that a second front of fraud was
being started and like all good
financial frauds in America it began in
Orange County California and we happen
to be the regional regulators for it and
our examiner's said they're making loans
without even checking what the
borrower's income is this is insane it
has to lead to massive losses and it
only makes sense for entities engaged in
these accounting control fraud and we
said yeah you're absolutely right and we
drove those
I earn loans out of the industry in 1990
and 1991 but we could only deal with the
industry we had jurisdiction over which
was savings and loans and so the biggest
and the baddest of the frauds Long Beach
savings voluntarily gave up its Federal
Savings and Loan Charter gave up Federal
Deposit Insurance converted to become a
mortgage bank for the sole purpose of
escaping our jurisdiction and changed
its name to America west and became the
most notorious of the liar's loans
frauds early on and to add to that they
deliberately predated upon minorities
right so we knew again about this crisis
we'd seen it before we'd stopped it
before we had incredibly early warnings
of it and it was absolutely unambiguous
that no honest lender would make loans
in this fashion so let's take a look at
the reaction of the industry and the
regulators and the prosecutors to these
clear early warnings that could have
prevented the crisis start with the
industry the industry responded between
2003 and 2006 by increasing liar's loans
by over 500% these were the loans that
hyper inflated the bubble and produced
the economic crisis by 2006 half of all
the loans called subprime were also
liar's loans they're not mutually
exclusive
it's just that together they're the most
toxic combination you can possibly
imagine
by 2006 40% of all the loans made that
year all the home loans made that year
were liar's loans 40% and this is
despite a warning from the industry's
own anti-fraud experts that said that
these loans were an open invitation to
fraudsters and that they had a fraud
incidence
90% nine zero in response to that the
industry first started calling these
loans liar's loans which lacks a certain
subtlety and second massively increase
them and no government regulator ever
required or encouraged any lender to
make a liar's loan or anyone to purchase
a liar's loan and that explicitly
includes Fannie and Freddie this came
from the lenders because of the fraud
recipe right what happened to appraisal
fraud yet expanded remarkably as well by
2007 when a survey of appraisers it was
done 90% of appraisers reported that
they've been subject to coercion from
the lenders trying to get them to
inflate an appraisal in other words both
forms of fraud became absolutely endemic
and normal and this is what drove the
bubble what happened in the governmental
sector well the government as I told you
when we were the savings and loan
regulators we could only deal with our
industry and if people gave up their
Federal Deposit Insurance we couldn't do
anything to them Congress may strike you
as impossible but actually did something
intelligent in 1994 and passed a home
ownership equity Protection Act that
gave the Fed and only the Federal
Reserve the explicit statutory authority
to ban liar's loans by every lender
whether or not they had Federal Deposit
Insurance so what did Ben Bernanke and
Alan Greenspan as chairs of the Fed do
when they got these warnings that these
were massively fraudulent loans and that
they were being sold to the secondary
market remember there's no fraud
Exorcist
once it starts out a fraudulent loan it
can only be sold to the secondary market
through more frauds of lying about the
reps and warranties and then those
people are going to produce
mortgage-backed securities and exotic
derivatives which are also
be supposedly backed by those fraudulent
loans so the fraud is going to progress
through the entire system hyper inflate
the bubble produce a disaster and
remember we had experience with this we
had seen significant losses and we had
experience of competent regulators in
stopping it Greenspan and Bernanke
refused to used the authority under the
statute to stop liar's loans and this
was a matter first of dogma they're just
you know horrific Allah opposed to
anything regulatory but it is also the
international competition in laxity the
race to the bottom between the United
States and the United Kingdom the City
of London in particular and the City of
London won that race to the bottom but
it meant that all regulation in the West
was completely degraded in this stupid
competition to be who could have the
weakest regulation so that was the
regulatory response what about the
response of the prosecutors after the
crisis after 11 trillion dollars in
losses after 10 million jobs lost a
crisis in which the losses and the
frauds were more than 70 times larger
than the Savings and Loan debacle well
in the Savings and Loan debacle our
agency that regulated savings and loans
OTS made over 30,000 criminal referrals
produced over a thousand felony
convictions just in cases designated as
major and that understates the degree of
prioritization because we worked with
the FBI to create the list of the top
100 fraud schemes the absolute worst of
the worst
nationwide roughly 300 savings and loans
involved roughly 600 senior officials
virtually all of them were prosecuted we
had a 90 percent conviction rate it's
the greatest success against elite
white-collar criminals ever and it was
because of this understanding of control
fraud and the accounting control fraud
mechanism flash forward to
the current crisis the same agency
office of Thrift Supervision which was
supposed to regulate many of the largest
makers of liar's loans in the country
maiya has made even today no longer
exists but as of a year ago it had made
zero criminal referrals the office the
Comptroller the currency which is
supposed to regulate the largest
national banks has made zero criminal
referrals the Fed appears to have made
zero criminal referrals the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation is smart
enough to refuse to answer the question
without any guidance from the regulators
they there's no expertise in the FBI to
investigate complex frauds it isn't
simply that they've had to reinvent the
wheel of how to do these prosecutions
they've forgotten that the wheel exists
and therefore we have zero prosecutions
and of course zero convictions of any of
the elite Bank frauds the wall street
types the trove this crisis with no
expertise coming from the regulator's
the FBI formed what it calls a
partnership with the Mortgage Bankers
Association in 2007 the Mortgage Bankers
Association is the trade association of
the perps and the Mortgage Bankers
Association set out it had the audacity
and the success to con the FBI it had
created a supposed definition of
mortgage fraud in which guess what its
members are always the victim and never
the perpetrators and the FBI has bought
this hook line sinker rod reel in a boat
they rode out and so the FBI under the
leadership of an attorney general who's
African American and a president of the
United States who is African American
have adopted the tea party definition of
the crisis in which it is the first
virgin crisis in history conceived
without sin
the executive ranks and it's those oh so
clever hairdressers who were able to
defraud the poor pitiful banks who lack
any financial sophistication it is the
silliest story you can conceive of and
so they go and they prosecute the
hairdresser's and they leave the
banksters alone entirely
so while lions are roaming the campsite
the FBI is chasing mice what do we need
to do what can we do in all of this we
need to change the perverse incentive
structures that produce these recurrent
epidemics of accounting control fraud
that are driving our crises so we have
to first get rid of the systemically
dangerous institutions these are the
so-called too-big-to-fail institutions
we need to shrink them to the point
within the next five years that they no
longer pose a systemic risk right now
they are ticking time bombs that will
cause a global crisis as soon as the
next one fails not if when second thing
we need to do is completely reform
modern executive and professional
compensation which is what they use to
suborn the appraisers remember they were
pressuring the appraisers through the
compensation system trying to produce
what we call a Gresham's dynamic in
which bad ethics drives good ethics out
of the marketplace and they largely
succeeded which is how the fraud became
endemic and the third thing that we need
to do is deal with what we call the
three DS deregulation D supervision and
the de facto decriminalization because
we can make all three of these changes
and if we do so we can dramatically
reduce how often we have a crisis and
how severe those crises are that is not
simply critical to our economy you can
see what these crises do to inequality
and what they do to our democracy they
have produced crony capitalism
american-style
in which the largest fine
national institutions are the leading
financial donors of both parties and
that's the reason why even after this
crisis a hundred you know 70 times
larger than the savings and loan crisis
we have no meaningful reforms in any of
the three areas that I've talked about
other than banning liar's loans which is
good but that's just one form of
ammunition for this fraud weapon there
are many forms of ammunition they can
use that's why we need to learn what the
bankers have learned the recipe for the
best way to rob a bank so that we can
stop that recipe because our legislators
who are dependent on political
contributions will not do it on their
own thank you very much
[Applause]
you